# Racket Megaparsack Test framework

## Overview

This is a test harness framework to automate unit testing for the custom indentation-sensitve Rhombus parser based on test cases from public copora and randomized test cases generated from `QuickCheck` libraries.

The framework compares the results generated by the self-defined Rhombus parser and those produced by the default Shrubbery parser. Both of the parsers should generate a result with a parsed representation of S-expression

A Makefile is used to provide shortcuts for running the relevant test scripts and performing other actions to investigate the behavior of custom parsers.

Available make targets:

- `test`           - Run the test harness on ./test/main.rkt
- `random_print`   - Print a randomly generated program using ./test/sexp-generator/utils/gen_helper.rkt
- `random_gen`     - Generate S-expressions and save the default pretty-print shrubbery notation using ./test/sexp-generator/sexp_generator.rkt
- `quickcheck`     - Run the Quickcheck test on ./test/rand_sexp_test.rkt
- `print_sexp`     - Print S-expression of the corpus (specify corpus in ./test/utils/sexp_string.rkt)
- `help`           - Show this help message

## Corpus and Test Harness

The Rhombus code from public Github repositories [kiranandcode/aoc-rhombus](https://github.com/kiranandcode/aoc-rhombus) and [samdphillips/aoc-2023](https://github.com/samdphillips/aoc-2023) are utilized as test cases. Some simple test cases have also been developed.

Each of the code used for test cases are stored in the files with extension of `rhm`. The code in `test/utils/file_utils.rkt` provides file handling utility functions to read file content and preprocess the original rhombus code such as removing language directives.

Parsing utility functions are in `test\utils\parse_utils.rkt`. It includes wrappers for calling the custom and default Rhombus which handle the parsing exception gracefully, methods to compare parser-generated S-expressions and keep track of the difference, and contracts and structures for parsing results and errors.

The `./test/utils/sexp_string.rkt` provides a script to print S-expressions of the parsed representation of all Rhombus code in the designated path. The script can be run using command `make print_sexp`.

The main test harness is in `main.rkt`. A suite of automated test cases is designed to read test cases from various categories of corpus (including successful, failed, random, and external cases). Within each test cases, the code from each file is paresed by default Shrubbery parser and custom parser, and the generated result which denotes the state of parsing and the generated S-exp representation will be compared using utility functions. Discrepencies in the parse result will cause the test case to fail. The testing script can be run using command `make test`

## Quickcheck

The result of parsing a valid Shrubbery file with custom Shrubbery parser is a syntax object with a parsed representation of S-expression. Here is the syntax structure for Shrubbery parsed expression:

```text
document ::= (top group*)
group ::= (group item* item)
          | (group item* block)
          | (group item* alts)
          | (group item* block alts)
item  ::= atom
          | (op symbol)
          | (parens group* )
          | (brackets group*)
          | (braces group*)
          | (quotes group*)
block ::= (block group*)
alts  ::= (alts block*)
```

`test\sexp-generator\utils\gen_helper.rkt` provides various methods from [QuickCheck](https://plt.cs.northwestern.edu/pkg-build/doc/quickcheck/index.html) library to construct generator for S-expression following the abovementioned syntax. The well-formed S-expression can be rewrite with default indentation and spacing setting using the `write-shurbbery` function from `shrubbery/write` library.

The script in `test\sexp-generator\sexp_generator.rkt` helps to save the randomly generated Shrubbery/Rhombus code to file with extension of `rhm`. The script can be run using command `make random_gen`

The test suite for random testing is in `test\rand_sexp_test.rkt`. The testing script can be run using command `make quickcheck`

## Dependencies & Libraries

| Package                           | Checksum        | Source              |
|------------------------------------|-----------------|---------------------|
| fmt                               | 002818ec08a...  | catalog....git      |
| megaparsack                       | 1d01c9ee274...  | catalog...sack      |
| megaparsack-indentation           |                 | link...tation\      |
| megaparsack-indentation-shrubbery |                 | link...ubbery\      |
| quickcheck                        | 0b6902d8d79...  | catalog...ster      |
| rackcheck                         | ffbddb7a9ed...  | catalog...heck      |
| rhombus                           | 2be797d2f33...  | catalog...mbus      |
| shrubbery-lib                     | 2be797d2f33...  | catalog...-lib      |
